https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Text_editor

Text editor

A text editor is a type of computer program that edits plain text. Such programs
are sometimes known as "notepad" software, following the naming of Microsoft
Notepad. Text editors are provided with operating systems and software
development packages, and can be used to change files such as configuration
files, documentation files and programming language source code.

Plain text vs. rich text

There are important differences between plain text (created and edited by text
editors) and rich text (such as that created by word processors or desktop
publishing software).

Plain text exclusively consists of character representation. Each character is
represented by a fixed-length sequence of one, two, or four bytes, or as a
variable-length sequence of one to four bytes, in accordance to specific
character encoding conventions, such as ASCII, ISO/IEC 2022, UTF-8, or Unicode.
These conventions define many printable characters, but also non-printing
characters that control the flow of the text, such as space, line break, and
page break. Plain text contains no other information about the text itself, not
even the character encoding convention employed. Plain text is stored in text
files, although text files do not exclusively store plain text. In the early
days of computers, plain text was displayed using a monospace font, such that
horizontal alignment and columnar formatting were sometimes done using
whitespace characters. For compatibility reasons, this tradition has not
changed.

Rich text, on the other hand, may contain metadata, character formatting data
(e.g. typeface, size, weight and style), paragraph formatting data (e.g.
indentation, alignment, letter and word distribution, and space between lines or
other paragraphs), and page specification data (e.g. size, margin and reading
direction). Rich text can be very complex. Rich text can be saved in binary
format (e.g. DOC), text files adhering to a markup language (e.g. RTF or HTML),
or in a hybrid form of both (e.g. Office Open XML).

Text editors are intended to open and save text files containing either plain
text or anything that can be interpreted as plain text, including the markup for
rich text or the markup for something else (e.g. SVG).

History

Before text editors existed, computer text was punched into cards with keypunch
machines. Physical boxes of these thin cardboard cards were then inserted into a
card-reader. Magnetic tape and disk "card-image" files created from such card
decks often had no line-separation characters at all, and assumed fixed-length
80-character records. An alternative to cards was punched paper tape. It could
be created by some teleprinters (such as the Teletype), which used special
characters to indicate ends of records.

The first text editors were "line editors" oriented to teleprinter- or
typewriter-style terminals without displays. Commands (often a single keystroke)
effected edits to a file at an imaginary insertion point called the "cursor".
Edits were verified by typing a command to print a small section of the file,
and periodically by printing the entire file. In some line editors, the cursor
could be moved by commands that specified the line number in the file, text
strings (context) for which to search, and eventually regular expressions. Line
editors were major improvements over keypunching. Some line editors could be
used by keypunch; editing commands could be taken from a deck of cards and
applied to a specified file. Some common line editors supported a "verify" mode
in which change commands displayed the altered lines.

When computer terminals with video screens became available, screen-based text
editors (sometimes called just "screen editors") became common. One of the
earliest full-screen editors was O26, which was written for the operator console
of the CDC 6000 series computers in 1967. Another early full-screen editor was
vi. Written in the 1970s, it is still a standard editor on Unix and Linux
operating systems. Also written in the 1970s was the UCSD Pascal Screen Oriented
Editor, which was optimized both for indented source code as well as general
text. Emacs, one of the first free and open source software projects, is another
early full-screen or real-time editor, one that was ported to many systems. A
full-screen editor's ease-of-use and speed (compared to the line-based editors)
motivated many early purchases of video terminals.

The core data structure in a text editor is the one that manages the string
(sequence of characters) or list of records that represents the current state of
the file being edited. While the former could be stored in a single long
consecutive array of characters, the desire for text editors that could more
quickly insert text, delete text, and undo/redo previous edits led to the
development of more complicated sequence data structures. A typical text editor
uses a gap buffer, a linked list of lines (as in PaperClip), a piece table, or a
rope, as its sequence data structure.


This page was last edited on 7 October 2021, at 18:47 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use
and Privacy Policy. WikipediaÂ® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia
Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
